THE ROLE OF RISK ANALYSIS IN REGIONALIZATION
V. Astudillo
Centro Panamericano de Fiebre Aftosa, Caixa Postal 589, 20001-970 Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil
Original: English
Summary: The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and the establishment of the World
Trade Organization (WTO) will radically change the ways in which countries prevent the introduction of
exotic animal diseases as a consequence of international trade in animals and animal products. The most
important rules are established in the Agreement on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures, based on
fundamental principles of non-discrimination, harmonisation, equivalence and transparency. These
measures require the implementation of regionalization and risk analysis. The Office International des
Epizooties (OIE) will play an important role in these developments by establishing internationally
accepted standards for these concepts. Slightly distinct, but perhaps not significantly different
approaches towards risk analysis and regionalization are emerging. If possible, these approaches must
be harmonised. However, most important is the timely collection of the information on which these
approaches must be based.
1. DEFINITIONS OF RISK ANALYSIS AND REGIONALIZATION
Risk analysis: the process that includes risk assessment, risk management and risk communication (1). Risk is the
likelihood of occurrences and consequences of an adverse event, such as a disease outbreak. Risk assessment is the
process of identifying a hazard and estimating the risk associated with the importation of a commodity and evaluating
the consequences of taking that risk. Risk management is the identification, analysis, decision and implementation of
measures that can be applied to reduce the risks and consequences of an adverse event. Risk communication is the
process of communicating the risk assessment results to all possible users (1,9).
Regionalization: recognition of geographical zones of a country that can be identified and characterized by their level
of risk for specific diseases. These zones can cover entire countries or parts of countries. Adjacent zones of different
countries having similar risk characteristics can be combined into international regions. The region must be clearly and
effectively delineated by natural, artificial or legal boundaries. The region must have common control policy for the
specific disease. There must be a uniform, effective system of epidemiological surveillance throughout the region. An
official sanitary agreement between the countries involved must be in effect (9).
2. GLOBAL ROLE OF RISK ANALYSIS IN REGIONALIZATION
Trade policies for animals, animal products and many other commodities will be guided by international trade
agreements according to the rules of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), the World Trade
Organization (WTO) or regional trading blocks such as the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). The
most important agreement in the animal health field is the Agreement on Sanitary and Phytosanitary (SPS) Measures,
based on fundamental principles of non-discrimination, harmonization, equivalence and transparency.
Although countries maintain the right to take appropriate measures to protect animal health, it will no longer be
justifiable to quote health requirements per se as reasons for non-tariff trade barriers. In this way, trade agreements will
depend largely on risk management based on risk assessments that are consistent, transparent and founded on valid
scientific evidence. The WTO designated the OIE as the scientific reference body in trade disputes concerning animals
and animal products. The OIE may therefore be called on in the future to determine the validity of risk assessments.
Consequently, the OIE is in the process of developing international standards, guidelines and recommendations for risk
analysis to ensure the harmonization, equivalence and transparency of animal health rules aimed at fair and free
international trade in animals and animal products. The OIE published a special issue of the Scientific and Technical
Review on risk analysis and animal health and trade (10) that contains several articles covering those subjects. In
addition, the 1993 & 1994 up dates of the International Animal Health Code (9) describe detailed procedures
recommended for international trade in animals, animal products, animal genetic material, foodstuffs, biological 
- 126 -
products and pathological material. There is no doubt that these two OIE publications will greatly stimulate the interest
and exchange of information on quantitative risk assessment and regionalization.
3. COUNTRY REPORTS
Reports for the present conference were received from the following OIE Member Countries of the region: Argentina,
Canada, Colombia, Cuba, Mexico, Paraguay and the United States of America (USA). Those reports provide clear
evidence that regionalization, aimed at preventing the introduction of exotic animal diseases with the least interference
to international trade, is of increasing significance in the decision making process of veterinary authorities.
Argentina - The report underlines the need for risk analysis and regionalization for free and fair trade in livestock and
livestock products. It indicates that an efficient surveillance and information system of an exporting country is the
basic support for risk analysis. The international trade of animals and products of animal origin between countries of
different animal disease status must be founded on risk management, based on consistent and well documented
scientific evidence. The report describes the methodology that Argentina is applying and includes a list of events that
can be used to evaluate the presence of the pathogen and those to estimate the probability of transmission or survival of
the agent. The report further discusses some of the considerations for regionalization, and aspects to be carefully
thought about in making a risk analysis.
Canada - Regionalization is not a new idea in Canada in facilitating the international movement of livestock and
livestock products. For instance, regionalization of bluetongue in the Okanagan Valley of British Columbia kept the
European market open for trade in livestock and livestock products. Regionalization of brucellosis and tuberculosis
facilitated the export of cattle to the USA. For imports, Canada accepts the regionalization of bluetongue in the
Australia and the USA.
The report stresses the importance of competent veterinary services, control of livestock movement and disease
surveillance, including adequate diagnostic laboratory facilities. Also, an exporting country must have a favourable
history of international reporting of animal diseases. Establishment of international standards for regionalization
according to the OIE principles are essential. Risk assessment must be the basis for the decision-making process, taking
into account country, commodity and exposure factors. However, the establishment of international standards and the
active participation of trading partners are fundamental.
Colombia - The report emphasizes the need to establish areas free of specific diseases. The "disease-free zone" concept
includes the evaluation of the risks of re-introduction of disease agents into the free areas. These risks depend on the
epidemiology of the disease, the disease situation of adjacent zones or provinces and the preventive measures used. The
report, furthermore, stresses the need to analyse risk according to uniform standards and considers that the OIE
Regional Commission for the Americas must take the lead in this harmonization.
Cuba - The country uses risk management in the seaports and airports with international activities. Its authorities have
requested the assistance of the Pan American Foot-and-Mouth Disease Center ("Panaftosa") for practical training in the
application of quantitative assessment.
Mexico - The report indicates that the country presently considers the regionalization concept an important tool in
facilitating international trade in livestock and livestock products. The use of this tool implies the application of risk
analysis. It includes evaluation of the Veterinary Services of the exporting region, an analysis of the possibilities of
introduction or re-introduction of a disease and of animal movement in and out of the region.
Paraguay - The report recognizes regionalization and risk analysis as important tools in facilitating international trade
of animals and products of animal origin. The criteria for specific risk evaluations, as well as sanitary requirements,
must be take into account the recommendations of the International Animal Health Code of the OIE.
United States of America - The USA report briefly describes risk analysis (i.e. risk assessment, risk management, and
risk communication) methodologies. Risk analysis and regionalization are tools for evaluating scientific information
and for establishing geographic areas which are identified and characterized by their risk levels for specific diseases.
Risk assessment may be either qualitative or quantitative, the latter being a probabilistic approach. Evaluations of the
effectiveness of the both veterinary infrastructure and disease surveillance, and the reliability of information are
important considerations in both approaches. The ultimate decision of what level of risk is acceptable to the importing
country must be based on a cost/benefit analysis.
4. DEVELOPMENTS IN THE AMERICAN REGION 
- 127 -
On 18 March 1994, the OIE Regional Commission for the Americas recommended that the countries of the Region
begin progressively using quantitative risk analysis to make decisions concerning the importation of livestock and
animal products, based on the standards described in the International Animal Health Code (9). The Regional
Commission further recommended that the staff of the Veterinary Services of Member countries be trained in the
methodologies of risk analysis, evaluation of veterinary services and regionalization. The country reports show that the
awareness of those needs is well recognised throughout the region. Professionals of individual countries, as well as
international organisations such as the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) through its Pan American Foot and
Mouth Disease Center (Panaftosa), have been active in these aspects. The staff of the Animal Plan Health Inspection
Service (APHIS) of the US Department of Agriculture prepared a comprehensive list of risk assessments (3) that
provides a synopsis of work in progress and of ongoing activities, with the goal of stimulating and encouraging
discussion on risk assessment. Panaftosa applied risk assessment methodologies to its specialised field and held several
training workshops/seminars on the subject in the Caribbean and in Latin America.
In view of the GATT and WTO agreements, APHIS/USDA developed, within the framework of the International
Animal Health Code of the OIE (9), a set of general criteria for the regionalization of levels of risk for countries or
regions with different disease status (2).
Presently, the USA applies the Tariff Act, adopted by Congress in 1930, to prohibit the import into the USA of
ruminants and pigs and their meat from countries infected with foot and mouth disease (FMD), except when those
products have been treated by heat and other methods which destroy the FMD virus (7). Countries may be considered
free from FMD provided that FMD has not occurred for at least one year, that vaccination is not used, and that
importation of animals and animal products are strictly regulated. All countries of Central America and Mexico have
regulations similar to those of the USA. The terms "disease free" and "not free" must be redefined for regionalization
criteria as proposed by APHIS (2). A "disease free" zone would not be risk free, while "not free" would not
automatically imply an absolute likelihood of failure. Risk levels are expressed as an abstract number (probability of
failure) varying from approaching zero to approaching one, but never quite reaching either zero or one. Within that
range the proposal recognises 6 risk levels: RN, R1, R2, R3, R4 and RU, where RN means "negligible Risk" and RU is
"unknown risk". These are the zones with the lowest and highest risk levels, respectively. Between those extremes are
R1 ¡æ R4, showing increasing levels of risk.
For the purpose of this report, the criteria for the animal disease regionalization, as presented by APHIS/USDA, were
tabulated in abbreviated form under the following headings: prevalence of the agent, vaccination policy, objectives of
the disease prevention or control program, and contacts with other (border) regions, as shown in Table 1.
In order for a region to be classified as having "negligible risk" for a specific disease, the causal agent must not have
been diagnosed within the region during the lifetime of any currently living susceptible animal. At the low and
moderate risk levels the disease must not have occurred within the past year and the maximum annual herd incidence
over the past 5 years must be less than 0.1%; however, there is no mention of the type of agent. Vaccination must be
prohibited in lower risk classes, but exceptions may be made for certain diseases such as vector transmitted diseases or
animals specifically vaccinated to meet the import requirements of other regions. There must be adequate policies and
infrastructure in place to respond to the program objectives. Regions of different risk levels must be separated by
natural or man-made barriers. Where mentioned in Table 1, all border access points must be strictly controlled to
prevent movement of susceptible animals or animal products from adjacent regions except under approved conditions.
Conditional import into the region must be conducted under conditions which are equivalent to those required by the
USA for export from countries with a similar disease status.
Risk management of commodities could vary from a simple certification of origin for products coming from low risk
zones to high security quarantine for importations originating from high risk zones. By developing this regionalization
strategy it would be feasible to recognise zones of a country as having a low risk level while other parts of the country
may be at higher risk. Adjacent zones of neighbouring countries with similar risk levels could be combined into
international regions. Obviously, the classification of zones or regions according to their risk level would have to be
transparent and well documented. Risk assessment for livestock or animal products and the risk level of the zone or
region of origin would determine the import risk of that product and the effectiveness of eventual risk reduction
measures. However, the determination of acceptable risk would ultimately be based on the benefits vs. costs of success
or failure in assuming the risk.
Table 1
Summary of general criteria for animal disease regionalization*
Prevalence of Agent Vaccination Program Objectives Border regions
- 128 -
RN
(negligible)
Not diagnosed within
lifetime of species
Prohibited during
lifetime of any
currently living
animal
Passive surveillance.
Emergency
preparedness
Agent not known to exist in
adjacent regions. Border
control R1, R2. Import
conditional for R1, R2, R3,
R4, RU.
R1
(very
low)
Not diagnosed
within past 5 years
Prohibited
Elim. of all
previously
vaccinated
animals
Passive and active
surveillance.
Emergency
preparedness
Border control for R2, R3,
R4, RU. Import conditional
for R2, R3, R4, RU
R2
(low)
Not diagnosed within
past year.
Maximum annual
herd incidence past 5
years less than 0.1%
Prohibited or
limited to herds at
risk
Passive and active
surveillance.
Emergency
preparedness
Border control for R3, R4
RU. Import conditional for
R3, R4, RU
R3
(moderate)
Diagnosed within
past year. Maximum
annual herd
incidence past 5
years not exceeding
0.1%0
Limited to herds
at risk
Passive and active
surveillance.
Elimination of
outbreaks
Border control for R3, R4 or
RU Import conditional
R4
(high)
Diagnosed annual
herd incidence past 5
years may have
exceeded 0.1%
Widely practised Passive and active
surveillance.
Restriction of
outbreaks
RU
(unknown)
Unknown
* APHIS/USDA (2).
Within its field of expertise, Panaftosa has applied risk assessment methodologies to FMD. Some of the assessments
were mostly qualitative: for example, the study by Astudillo et al. (4) on the prevention of reintroduction of FMD in
Chile. Other risk assessments were more quantitative. For instance, at the request of the Caribbean countries, a study
was made on the risk of importation of meat from selected regions of Argentina and Uruguay (12). That study used a
stochastic model based on the epidemiological behaviour of the disease in the South American countries. It covered
disease prevalence and the capability of the animal health surveillance system to detect the disease at the source of the
products, as well as during the transportation of the animals to the slaughter plant. It also covered the efficacy of anteand post-mortem examinations. Finally, the model took account of the probability that FMD virus may survive
deboning, chilling and processing. Under the auspices of Panaftosa, Sutmoller and Wrathall (13) studied the risk of
FMD transmission by bovine embryo transfer. In a further study, those authors compared the risk of FMD, bluetongue
and vesicular stomatitis (14).
In both models, emphasis was placed on disease prevalence, the efficacy of the animal health surveillance system and
the competence of the embryo collection team. These risk analysis studies depended directly on the information
generated by the Continental Vesicular Disease Surveillance and Information System in South America, coordinated by
Panaftosa (5). This system is composed of a network of national disease surveillance systems that report
epidemiological information on weekly basis. Panaftosa compiles this information and reports back to the countries by
means of weekly and monthly epidemiological bulletins (11). In the event of an emerging epidemiological problem,
communication is immediate. The National Vesicular Disease Surveillance Systems use the existing animal health
infrastructure, including over 2 600 local field units of the national FMD control and eradication programs. In addition,
there is an effective participation of the private sector, particularly of the livestock industry. The geographical coverage
of each field unit is represented by a quadrant of the country's map according to geographical coordinates (5,6). Each 
- 129 -
quadrant has a numeric code and all epidemiological information is identified accordingly for communication with
other units or the central level of each country and with Panaftosa.
The Continental Vesicular Disease Surveillance and Information System has provided up-to-date epidemiological
information on the behavior of FMD in the field and alerted veterinary authorities to the development of higher risk
situations and emerging problems. The information collected allowed the timely evaluation and orientation of animal
health strategies for a more effective and efficient control and eradication of FMD. The system was also the foundation
for the characterization and regionalization of ecosystems of FMD endemism. This FMD regionalization in South
America has evolved over the past 20 years (10) and was instrumental in the development of regional strategies for the
eradication and control of FMD.
This same metodology provides an excellent opportunity for a risk regionalization for livestock and livestock products,
that in principle would be similar to the proposed APHIS/USDA program (2), but obviously would be more disease
specific. In Table 2, the letters A, B, C and D denote the different risk levels, where A indicates the lowest FMD risk
for an importing country, and D the highest risk.
Table 2
South America foot and mouth disease risk classification
Risk level Frequency of FMD Viral activity Vaccination Program objectives Border region
A1 >5 years no FMD No No Prevention A2, B1, B2
A2 C*, D*
B1 >2 years no FMD Neg** Yes Eradication and
prevention
B2, C, D*
B2 1-2 years no FMD ?? Yes C, D*
C Sporadic Yes Yes Advanced control D
D Endemic Yes Yes Control
 * Require effective natural or man-made barriers
 ** According to serological and virological surveys
The main considerations for the Panaftosa risk regionalization are the time periods during which clinical cases are
absent, the presence or absence of FMD viral activity, and whether or not FMD vaccination is used. A non-vaccinated,
fully susceptible livestock population guarantees the absence of any occult viral activity. In the A1 and A2 risk level
regions FMD must not have occurred for at least five consecutive years and vaccine must not have been used for at
least one year. A FMD prevention program, including import controls, must be in operation. The next consideration is
the FMD situation in the surrounding regions. For instance, A2 level regions are those A regions which border regions
classified as C or D. Therefore, to prevent disease introduction, those A2 regions will likely have to be separated from
the C or D level regions by natural or man-made barriers. These regions must maintain a strong, active vesicular disease
surveillance, particularly in the border areas.
The objectives of the FMD program in B risk level regions are eradication and prevention, but vaccination is used to
control the disease. B1 level regions must have been free from FMD for at least two years and in B2 level regions this
period is set between one and two years. In order for a region to be classified as B1, there must be sufficient evidence,
through survey methods or otherwise, to demonstrate the absence of viral activity in the livestock population. C risk
level regions have only sporadic cases of FMD and advanced control programs aimed at eradication must be present.
Regions classified as D are those in which FMD is endemic and where there is a control program. Of course, the
proposed classification is based on present data and regionalization is a continuous dynamic process. For example,
Paraguay has not registered any cases of FMD over the past year, and therefore its classification changed to a lower risk
category a few months ago.
The map in Figure 1 illustrates the present regionalization: the south of Chile, Patagonia, Surinam, French Guyana and
Uruguay are in the A1 risk level. Guyana, the Choco region in the northwest of Colombia and the north of Chile are
classified as A2, but large parts of South America, with a majority of the best cattle-raising regions, are classified as B.
The B1 risk level regions, which have been without FMD for more than two years, include the Argentine province of
Mesopotamia, while the B2 level regions, where FMD has not occurred during the last 1-2 years, cover the rest of
Argentina, Paraguay, and the States of Rio Grande do Sul and Santa Catarina of Brazil; the remaining parts of the
continent are in either the C or D risk levels. Thus, according to this risk regionalization, important livestock regions of 
- 130 -
South America are in the lowest categories with over 90 million head of cattle, some 40 million sheep and 10 million
swine.
5. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
In the present developmental stage it is not surprising that slightly different approaches towards risk analysis and
regionalization are emerging. The first one was advanced by Morley & Acree (8). They defined unrestricted import risk
as the product of the probability of agent entry and the probability of livestock exposure in the importing country.
The probability of agent entry is a function of the country factor (prevalence of List A or List B diseases (9) and
evaluation of the Veterinary Services of the exporting country), the commodity factor (species, age and breed of
animals, diagnostic tests, stability of the agent, etc.) and the number of Animal Import Units. The probability of
exposure in the importing country is the likehood that the agent infects and spreads throughout a susceptible population
in the importing country. The unrestricted risk can be mitigated by risk reduction measures. This approach was
summarized in the Guidelines for risk assessment in the 1993 & 1994 Up-dates of the International Animal Health
Code (8). Variants on these guidelines have been used for individual risk assessments using scenario trees or pathways
(3,8,12,13,14). Using this method, for each individual analysis a pathway of potential risk events is traced from the
point of origin of the product to its final destination. For each event in the scenario pathway the following questions are
asked: "What can go wrong?", "How often is this likely to happen?", and "What will be the consequences?" (10).
Accumulation of quantitative answers to these questions for all the events in the pathway constitutes the measure of risk
related to the importation. The great advantage of the scenario tree or pathway model is that it permits clear
presentation of the country and commodity factors with regard to quantification and documentation.
The OIE guidelines (9) for regionalization define disease free zones, with or without vaccination, infected zones,
surveillance zones and buffer zones. The APHIS proposal for regionalization quite precisely characterizes and redefines
"disease free" and "not free" in terms of levels or degree of risk. Within each risk level, risk assessments can be made
for different commodities and risk reduction measures can be used to reach a level of acceptable import risk. The
Panaftosa risk regionalization is a variant of the APHIS proposal, but is specific to the FMD situation in South
America. For instance, it includes the category "viral activity". The level of sophistication of the Panaftosa
regionalization is a reflection of the reliability and detailed character of epidemiological information generated by the
Continental Vesicular Disease Surveillance and Information System.
The final decision on the acceptable level of risk by the importing country is made by taking a risk-related cost-benefit
analysis into account. 